Q: What is global warming.
A: Here's a simple definition of global warming. |And yes, it's really happening.| Over the past 50 years,
the average global temperature has increased at the fastest rate in recorded history. And experts see
the trend is accelerating: All but one of the 16 hottest years in NASA’s 134-year record have occurred
since 2000.

Climate change deniers have argued that there has been a “pause” or a “slowdown” in rising global temperatures,
but several recent studies, including a 2015 paper published in the journal Science, have disproved this
claim. And scientists say that unless we curb global-warming emissions, average U.S. temperatures could
increase by up to 10 degrees Fahrenheit over the next century.

Q: What causes global warming.
A: Global warming occurs when carbon dioxide |CO2| and other air pollutants and greenhouse gases collect
in the atmosphere and absorb sunlight and solar radiation that have bounced off the earth’s surface.
Normally, this radiation would escape into space—but these pollutants, which can last for years to centuries
in the atmosphere, trap the heat and cause the planet to get hotter. That's what's known as the greenhouse
effect.

In the United States, the burning of fossil fuels to make electricity is the largest source of heat-trapping
pollution, producing about two billion tons of CO2 every year. Coal-burning power plants are by far the
biggest polluters. The country’s second-largest source of carbon pollution is the transportation sector,
which generates about 1.7 billion tons of CO2 emissions a year.

Curbing dangerous climate change requires very deep cuts in emissions, as well as the use of alternatives
to fossil fuels worldwide. The good news is that we’ve started a turnaround: CO2 emissions in the United
States actually decreased from 2005 to 2014, thanks in part to new, energy-efficient technology and the
use of cleaner fuels. And scientists continue to develop new ways to modernize power plants, generate
cleaner electricity, and burn less gasoline while we drive. The challenge is to be sure these solutions
are put to use and widely adopted.

Q: How is global warming linked to extreme weather.
A: Scientists agree that the earth’s rising temperatures are fueling longer and hotter heat waves, more
frequent droughts, heavier rainfall, and more powerful hurricanes. In 2015, for example, scientists said
that an ongoing drought in California—the state’s worst water shortage in 1,200 years—had been intensified
by 15 percent to 20 percent by global warming. They also said the odds of similar droughts happening
in the future had roughly doubled over the past century. And in 2016, the National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine announced that it’s now possible to confidently attribute certain weather events,
like some heat waves, directly to climate change.

The earth’s ocean temperatures are getting warmer, too—which means that tropical storms can pick up more
energy. So global warming could turn, say, a category 3 storm into a more dangerous category 4 storm.
In fact, scientists have found that the frequency of North Atlantic hurricanes has increased since the
early 1980s, as well as the number of storms that reach categories 4 and 5. In 2005, Hurricane Katrina—the
costliest hurricane in U.S. history—struck New Orleans; the second-costliest, Hurricane Sandy, hit the
East Coast in 2012.

The impacts of global warming are being felt across the globe. Extreme heat waves have caused tens of
thousands of deaths around the world in recent years. And in an alarming sign of events to come, Antarctica
has been losing about 134 billion metric tons of ice per year since 2002. This rate could speed up if
we keep burning fossil fuels at our current pace, some experts say, causing sea levels to rise several
meters over the next 50 to 150 years.

Q: What are the other effects of global warming.
A: Each year, scientists learn more about the consequences of global warming, and many agree that environmental,
economic, and health consequences are likely to occur if current trends continue. Here’s just a smattering
of what we can look forward to:

Melting glaciers, early snowmelt, and severe droughts will cause more dramatic water shortages and increase
the risk of wildfires in the American West.
Rising sea levels will lead to coastal flooding on the Eastern Seaboard, especially in Florida, and in
other areas such as the Gulf of Mexico.
Forests, farms, and cities will face troublesome new pests, heat waves, heavy downpours, and increased
flooding. All those factors will damage or destroy agriculture and fisheries.
Disruption of habitats such as coral reefs and Alpine meadows could drive many plant and animal species
to extinction.
Allergies, asthma, and infectious disease outbreaks will become more common due to increased growth of
pollen-producing ragweed, higher levels of air pollution, and the spread of conditions favorable to pathogens
and mosquitoes.