Our solar system consists of an average star we call the Sun, the planets Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. It includes: the satellites of the planets; numerous comets,
asteroids, and meteoroids; and the interplanetary medium. The Sun is the richest source of electromagnetic
energy |mostly in the form of heat and light| in the solar system. The Sun's nearest known stellar neighbor
is a red dwarf star called Proxima Centauri, at a distance of 4.3 light years away. The whole solar system,
together with the local stars visible on a clear night, orbits the center of our home galaxy, a spiral
disk of 200 billion stars we call the Milky Way. The Milky Way has two small galaxies orbiting it nearby,
which are visible from the southern hemisphere. They are called the Large Magellanic Cloud and the Small
Magellanic Cloud. The nearest large galaxy is the Andromeda Galaxy. It is a spiral galaxy like the Milky
Way but is 4 times as massive and is 2 million light years away. Our galaxy, one of billions of galaxies
known, is traveling through intergalactic space.
The planets, most of the satellites of the planets and the asteroids revolve around the Sun in the same
direction, in nearly circular orbits. When looking down from above the Sun's north pole, the planets
orbit in a counter-clockwise direction. The planets orbit the Sun in or near the same plane, called the
ecliptic. Pluto is a special case in that its orbit is the most highly inclined |18 degrees| and the
most highly elliptical of all the planets. Because of this, for part of its orbit, Pluto is closer to
the Sun than is Neptune. The axis of rotation for most of the planets is nearly perpendicular to the
ecliptic. The exceptions are Uranus and Pluto, which are tipped on their sides.
Composition Of The Solar System

The Sun contains 99.85s of all the matter in the Solar System. The planets, which condensed out of the
same disk of material that formed the Sun, contain only 0.135s of the mass of the solar system. Jupiter
contains more than twice the matter of all the other planets combined. Satellites of the planets, comets,
asteroids, meteoroids, and the interplanetary medium constitute the remaining 0.015s. The following table
is a list of the mass distribution within our Solar System.
Sun: 99.85s
Planets: 0.135s
Comets: 0.01s .
Satellites: 0.00005s
Minor Planets: 0.0000002s .
Meteoroids: 0.0000001s .
Interplanetary Medium: 0.0000001s .
Interplanetary Space

Nearly all the solar system by volume appears to be an empty void. Far from being nothingness, this vacuum
of "space" comprises the interplanetary medium. It includes various forms of energy and at least two
material components: interplanetary dust and interplanetary gas. Interplanetary dust consists of microscopic
solid particles. Interplanetary gas is a tenuous flow of gas and charged particles, mostly protons and
electrons -- plasma -- which stream from the Sun, called the solar wind.

The solar wind can be measured by spacecraft, and it has a large effect on comet tails. It also has a
measurable effect on the motion of spacecraft. The speed of the solar wind is about 400 kilometers |250
miles| per second in the vicinity of Earth's orbit. The point at which the solar wind meets the interstellar
medium, which is the "solar" wind from other stars, is called the heliopause. It is a boundary theorized
to be roughly circular or teardrop-shaped, marking the edge of the Sun's influence perhaps 100 AU from
the Sun. The space within the boundary of the heliopause, containing the Sun and solar system, is referred
to as the heliosphere.
The solar magnetic field extends outward into interplanetary space; it can be measured on Earth and by
spacecraft. The solar magnetic field is the dominating magnetic field throughout the interplanetary regions
of the solar system, except in the immediate environment of planets which have their own magnetic fields.
The Terrestrial Planets
The terrestrial planets are the four innermost planets in the solar system, Mercury, Venus, Earth and
Mars. They are called terrestrial because they have a compact, rocky surface like the Earth's. The planets,
Venus, Earth, and Mars have significant atmospheres while Mercury has almost none. The following diagram
shows the approximate distance of the terrestrial planets to the Sun.

The Jovian Planets
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune are known as the Jovian |Jupiter-like| planets, because they are
all gigantic compared with Earth, and they have a gaseous nature like Jupiter's. The Jovian planets are
also referred to as the gas giants, although some or all of them might have small solid cores. The following
diagram shows the approximate distance of the Jovian planets to the Sun.