"Is there any proof that God exists." was asked, by an atheist, of Imam Abu Hanifa and he replied, "Forget
it! At the moment, I am busy thinking about this ship. People tell me there is a big ship, it contains
different goods on board. There is no one to steer it, no one maintaining it. Yet, this ship keeps going
back and forth; it even traverses big waves on the oceans; it stops at the locations that it is supposed
to stop at; it continues in the direction that it is supposed to head. This ship has no captain and no
one planning its trips."

The atheist who posed the question interrupted and exclaimed, "What kind of strange and silly thought
is this. How can any intelligent person think that some thing like this can occur."

Imam Abu Hanifa said, "I feel sorry about your state! You cannot imagine one ship running without some
one looking after its affairs. Yet you think that for this whole world, which runs exactly and precisely,
there is no one who looks after it, and no one owns it."

Hearing the reply, the atheist was left speechless but he found out more about Haqq |The Truth| and proclaimed
Islam.


Imam Shaa'fi replied to the question in the following way, "The leaves of Toot |berries| are all but one.
Each leaf tastes exactly the same. Insects, honey bees, cows, goats, and deer live off of it. After eating
these the insects produce silk; bees produce honey; deer give musk |a special kind of scent|, cows and
goats deliver off-springs. Is this not clear evidence that one kind of leaf has so many qualities, and
who created these qualities. It is the Khaliq |Creator| who we call Allah |S.W.T.| Who is the Inventor
and the Creator."

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal reflected on the question in the following way. He said, "There is an incredibly
strong fort, it has no doors, there is no way to get in. In fact, there is not even a hole in it. From
outside it glows like the moon and from inside it shimmers like gold. It is sealed from all sides, matter
of fact it is air tight. Suddenly one of its doors breaks down, a living thing with eyes and ears, a
beautiful looking animal appears yelling and wandering all over. So is not there a creator who made it
possible for life to take place in this secured and closed fort. And is not this Creator better than
humans. This Creator has no limit." Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal was referring to an egg which is closed from
all sides but Allah |S.W.T.| The Khaliq |Creator| puts life in it and a chick pops out.